\ifndef{dataAsAConvener}
\define{dataAsAConvener}

\editme

\subsection{Data as a Convener}

\slides{* Data allows externalisation of cognition.
* Even when not existing, can ask: What data would we want?}

\notes{To improve communication, we need to 'externalise cognition':
have objects that are outside our brains, are persistent in the real
world, that we can combine with our individual knowledge. Doing
otherwise leaves us imagining the world as our personal
domain-utopias, ignoring the ugly realities of the way things actual
progress.}

\notes{Data can provide an excellent convener, because even if it
doesn't exist it allows conversations to occur about what data should
or could exist and how it might allow us to address the questions of
importance.}

\notes{Models, while also of great potential value in externalising
cognition, can be two complex to have conversations about and they can
entrench beliefs, triggering *model induced blindness* (a variation on
Kahneman's *theory induced blindness* [@Kahneman-fastslow11]).}

\newslide{}

\figure{\includediagram{\diagramsDir/policy/anne-bob-model}{70%}}{Models
can also be used to externalise cognition, but if the model is highly
complex it's difficult for two individuals to understand each others'
models. This shuts down conversation, often "mathematical
intimidation" is used to shut down a line of questioning. This is
highly destructive of the necessary cognitive
diversity.}{anne-bob-model}

\notes{Bandwidth constraints on individuals mean that they tend to
focus on their own specialism. This can be particularly problematic
for those on the more theoretical side, because mathematical models
are complex, and require a lot of deep thought. However, when
communicating with others, unless they have the same in depth
experience of mathematical modelling as the theoreticians, the models
do not bring about good information coherehence. Indeed, many
computational models themselves are so complex now that no individual
can understand the model whole.}

\newslide{}

\figure{\includediagram{\diagramsDir/policy/anne-bob-data}{70%}}{Data
can be queried, but the simplest query, what data do we need? Doesn't
even require the data to exist. It seems data can be highly effective
for convening a multidisciplinary conversation.}{anne-bob-data}


\notes{Fritz Heider referred to happenings that are "*psychologically
represented* in each of the participants" [@Heider:interpersonal58] as
a prerequisite for conversation. Data is a route to that psychological
representation.}

\notes{*Note*: my introduction to Fritz Heider was through a talk by
Nick Chater in 2010, you can read Nick's thoughts on these
issues in his book, *The Mind is Flat* [@Chater:mindisflat19].}

\endif
