\ifndef{stormingTheCastle}
\define{stormingTheCastle}


\editme


\subsection{Storming the Castle}

\centerdiv{\sirLancelotTheBravePicture{15%}}

\slides{* Policy is complex and uncertain.
* Requires a multi-disciplinary response.
* Scientists view themselves as Merlins but the reality differs.}

\addblog{Storming the Castle: Data Science for Covid 19 Policy}{2020/10/13/storming-the-castle}

\notes{The response needed for policy questions is comlplex and
uncertain. It requires a multi-disciplinary response. But much of
science is actually faith based. To be successful an individual
scientist has to learn to believe in their own idea. This faith is
required, often across many years. There are struggles of funding,
publication and building and maintaining a group. The natural result
is that individual scientists are not always very scientific in their
thinking.}

\notes{In the classic film Monty Python and the Holy Grail, John
Cleese, as Sir Lancelot the Brave, finds a note – a plea from a
prisoner of Swamp Castle – beseeching the discoverer to help them
escape an unwanted marriage. Responding to this distress call, Sir
Lancelot singlehandedly storms Swamp Castle, slaying the guards,
terrorising the wedding guests, and fighting his way to the Tall
Tower. There, instead of the expected damsel in distress, cruelly
imprisoned, Sir Lancelot is surprised to find a wayward groom, Prince
Herbert, who sent the note after an argument with his father.}

\notes{The United Kingdom is considered an international leader in
science, and a pioneer in the provision of science advice. The
Government has well-established structures for accessing scientific
expertise in emergencies through its network of science advisers, the
Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) and departmental
advisory committees, including the Science for Pandemic Influenza
Groups that provide advice on covid-19 modelling and behavioural
science. Together, these structures might call to mind a different
Arthurian vision, evoking the works of Thomas Malory: the scientist as
Merlin, giving wise counsel to Arthur and honing the Government’s
decision-making through deep knowledge of the scientific arts.}

\notes{Scientists are concerned citizens, and it is perhaps with this
vision of adviser as trusted arbiter that many researchers entered
into public and policy debates surrounding covid-19. While pursuing
the wise Merlin, however, efforts to advise government can easily
drift towards Monty Python’s Lancelot. Confident in his knowledge of
castle-storming, his individual dedication and his skills in
damsel-rescuing, Sir Lancelot enters the fray with only a partial
understanding of the challenges and circumstances at hand.}

\notes{Indeed, on his way to the tower, Sir Lancelot is so focussed on
his task that he doesn't notice that he fights his way through the
bridal party, knocking the down the bride on his way to the tower.}

\notes{We cannot afford to address policy questions in this manner
[@Montgomery-storming20].}


\endif
