\ifndef{welcome}
\define{welcome}
\editme

\section{Course Texts}

\include{_ml/includes/first-course-book.md}

\newslide{Additional Course Text}

\include{_ml/includes/prml-book.md}

\notes{Welcome to the Machine Learning and Adaptive Intelligence
course. In this course we will introduce the basic concepts of machine
learning and data science. In particular we will look at tools and
techniques that describe how to model. An integrated part of that is
how we approach data with the computer. We are choosing to do that
with the tool you see in front of you: the Jupyter Notebook.}

\notes{The notebook provides us with a way of interacting with the
data that allows us to give the computer instructions and explore the
nature of a data set. It is *different* to normal coding, but it is
related. In this course you will, through intensive practical sessions
and labs, develop your understanding of the interaction between data
and computers.  The first thing we are going to do is ask you to
forget a bit about what you think about normal programming, or
'classical software engineering'. Classical software engineering
demands a large amount of design and testing. In data analysis,
testing remains very important, but the design is often evolving. The
design evolves through a process known as *exploratory data
analysis*. You will learn some of the techniques of exploratory data
analysis in this course.}

\notes{A particular difference between classical software engineering
and data analysis is the way in which programs are run. Classically we
spend a deal of time working with a text editor, writing
code. Compilations are done on a regular basis and aspects of the code
are tested (perhaps with unit tests).}

\notes{Data analysis is more like coding in a debugger. In a debugger
(particularly a visual debugger) you interact with the data stored in
the memory of the computer to try and understand what is happening in
the computer, you need to understand exactly what your bug is: you
often have a fixed idea of what the program is trying to do, you are
just struggling to find out why it isn't doing it.}

\notes{Naturally, debugging is an important part of data analysis
also, but in some sense it can be seen as its entire premise. You load
in a data set into a computer that you don't understand, your entire
objective is to understand the data. This is best done by interogating
the data to visualise it or summarize it, just like in a power visual
debugger. However, for data science the requirements for visualization
and summarization are far greater than in a regular program. When the
data is well understood, the actual number of lines of your program
may well be very few (particularly if you disregard commands that load
in the data and commands which plot your results). If a powerful data
science library is available, you may be able to summarize your code
with just two or three lines, but the amount of intellectual energy
that is expended on writing those three lines is far greater than in
standard code.}

\endif
