---
title: Will AI Make the Workplace - Wherever it is - More Equal?
abstract: >
  COVID-19 has brought more flexible working, particularly
  homeworking, for many. Will those changes be sustained after the
  pandemic and allow previously excluded workers into the labour
  market? And how will the artificial intelligence revolution affect
  the jobs we do and who does them? With Drs Christopher Markou, Helen
  McCarthy, Neil Lawrence and Stella Pachidi.

  This event is taking place in partnership with The Hay Festival
  (<www.hayfestival.com>)
venue: Virtual Cambridge Alumni Event 
url: https://www.alumni.cam.ac.uk/festival/events/will-ai-make-the-workplace-wherever-it-is-more-equal
youtube: X9sx2F3AELs
youtube_start: 2155
youtube_end: 2656
author:
- given: Henry
  family: Shevlin
  twitter: dioscuri
  institute: University of Cambridge
  url: http://henryshevlin.com/
- given: Helen 
  family: McCarthy
  twitter: HistorianHelen
  institute: University of Cambridge
  url: https://www.hist.cam.ac.uk/people/dr-helen-mccarthy
- given: Christopher
  family: Markou
  url: https://www.law.cam.ac.uk/people/cp-markou/6574
  institute: University of Cambridge
  twitter: cpmarkou
  orchid: 
- given: Stella
  family: Pachidi
  url: https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/faculty-research/faculty-a-z/stella-pachidi/
  institute: University of Cambridge
  twitter: StellaPachidi
  orchid: 
- given: Neil D.
  family: Lawrence
  url: http://inverseprobability.com
  institute: University of Cambridge
  twitter: lawrennd
  gscholar: r3SJcvoAAAAJ
  orchid: 
date: 2020-09-19
layout: talk
reveal: False
---

What follows is a transcript of the section where I spoke. I refer to other Helen's talk quite a lot in mine. My talk was unscripted so
apologies for inaccuracies and colloquialisms.

Thank you Henry, and thanks to everyone that's spoken so far, I've
really enjoyed hearing such a diversity of perspectives on Artificial
Intelligence so my own background as Henry said is as a Machine
Learning researcher and I've been doing that for about 20 years and I
guess it's gone from a technology we were working on to one that's
widespread everywhere. It's basically what everyone is calling
Artificial Intelligence.

So I've ended up moving towards trying to explain a little bit about
what I think the social phenomena are behind AI, although I was
working on the algorithms I became very interested in what the effects
of those algorithms are going to be. I really wanted to start by
harking back to Helen's talk which I really enjoyed, particularly the
images.

So having spent the best part of 20 years in Sheffield, where I was
professor before, the costume of Yorkshire in 1814, which is
representing a sort of bygone world that if you live in the North, it
existed everywhere, it haunts the landscape. That world as Helen so
beautifully described was often based on this mix between homeworking
and an emerging industrial society. We used to cycle down to Cromford
which is the birthplace of Arkwright's Factory system and that's all
based around these ideas that Helen was talking about.

So, I was at Amazon for 3 years as Henry said. I was at Amazon, not
because I was interested in working on funky AI systems, like these
new intelligent agents. But I was really really interested in one of
the most important things that surrounds us, and that is the supply
chain. And I ended up deploying machine learning solutions in the
Supply Chain.

You might think ... "Well ... Supply Chain ... that can't be very
interesting". But one of the things we saw in Helen's presentation was the
way that different groups at different times were either being
victimised or liberated by their homeworking conditions and I think
that's a super-important point because there were pressures on those
workers that are emerging from economic forces. And those are the
forces that home workers experience. So I wanted to just talk a little
bit about how, what we call artificial intelligence, is affecting
those pressures and how we should be aware of what the future's going
to look like. And what I wanted to mention was that something that my
colleague at Amazon [Narayan Venkatasubramanyan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/narayan3rdeye/) at Amazon once told
me. He'd been in Supply Chain his whole career. He was towards the end
of his career and Amazon was his last spin, and he once said to me
... he was from Bombay and had this wonderful deep resonant voice that
I can't do ... so you have to imagine him saying this in a beautiful
voice that almost sounds like a god.

\centerdiv{\narayanVenkatasubramanyanPicture{15%}}

He said: "The biggest change that occured over the 20th century is the
switch from a push supply chain to a pull supply chain." So what does
he mean by that? Well he went on to describe he said "Look if hyou
manufactured something at the end of the Second World War you could
sell it to anyone." There was this boom in the number of different
vehicles that people were making and selling because the was a
shortage of manufacturing. The biggest shift we saw occurring
around the 50s and 60s and 70s, as you gained more and more
manufacturers was ... because the power is with those who are
manufacturing initially ... but then when you have an over supply of
manufacturers because more and more countries become industrialised
and get involved ... the power shifts to the distributor. So the
distributor now has a choice of places they can go and they have a
choice of poeple that they can do business with. This applies pressure
on the manufacturers or the farmers or whoever the supplier is. 

Supply chain is about matching supply to demand and there are three
components. There is the demand, what people want, there's the supply,
what people are making and there's the transport logistics
infrastructure for matching those. And what we saw was a massive shift
from the power being with manufacturers to the power being with
distributors. Big supermarkets, Amazon itself, Walmart. The people
that control the market control the distribution. And that stuck with
me a lot. It stuck with me because I was reading a profile of John
McDonnel our former Shadow Chancellor, and at some point he
wrote [said]: "Well you know I have to say I'm an old fashioned at
heart, at heart I believe that we should be controlling the means of
production."

Well how dumb is that is no one is making any money out of
production. Because what Marx was on about is the value is being
created in manufacturing. He's talking about an era when the
manufacturers are in charge. And the shift we've seen is that they
aren't in charge. You can control the means of production, you control
the people who are on the smallest margins who are having to work
extremely hard to distribute their goods just in time. The value is
all being made in distribution, so the modern Marx would be "control
the means of distribution". 

So how does AI and Machine Learning effect that? Well, today we're
seeing a further shift. One thing is to control supply, but what if
you go all the other way to the other side and you try to control
demand. What if you can manipulate what people want. What if you can
steer them to buy things that they didn't formerly want. Well that's the
modern way of making money. Of course it's called advertising, but
what the internet allows, and let's be very clear that this isn't a
story about AI, but this is a story about a massively interconnected
world where information is flowing very rapidly. All AI is, is a set
of algorithms that makes people able to make decisions on the back of
that data. And what the companies that are making the most money at
the moment are doing is advertising to you. And they make very very
large profits through that. Because if you can control demand, that's
way better than controlling supply or distribution. And that's the big
shift we see for the future of work.

\addguardian{The data-driven economy will help marketers exploit us}{2015/jul/23/data-driven-economy-marketing}

\addguardian{Digital Oligarchies}{2015/mar/05/digital-oligarchy-algorithms-personal-data}

Now, what can we do about it? Well of course, the raw material ... the
clever bit about Marx is that the value is coming from the worker, so
you have to do things to empower the worker. So [regardless of]
whether you believe in communism, which I'm certainly not a communist
myself, it's true that you need to rebalance the equation so that
eeverything is not controlled by the person that owns the mill. So you
get workers' rights, and what's the modern equivalent of that? Well
it's data rights. And these aren't new, in fact they go back to this
book called
["The Assault on Privacy"](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Assault-Privacy-Computers-Banks-Dossiers/dp/0472655000)
and this wonderful quote. "Today's Laser Technology already makes it
feasible to stor ea 20 page dossier on every American on a piece of
tape that is less than 5000 feet long". It's written by a Guy called
[Arthur Miller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_R._Miller), it's
written in 1970. Aleady then they realised the power of information,
but they did not have this interconnected world. Now we already have
legislation in this space, and it's got the most appauling name ever
because it's called "Data Protection" legislation. But if you look
back to the original legislation and you look at the original title,
and I have to read it because I never remember it "THe convention for
the protection of individuals with regard to automatic processing of
personal data" and that's what you need protecting against.

Now the unfortunate thing is that "The Assault on Privacy" and what
people thought about then was all about consequential decision
making. That decisions are being made about you, about legal decision
making, it applies about whether you get to go to University, it
applies whether you get a loan or not. But the big thing in terms of
the modern era is the 'inconsequential decision making' of all the
things you're shown on Facebook, your newsfeed, your twitter feed, the
adverts shown. None of which you gain any rights about. And the only
way we regain those rights is to strengthen our own personal data
rights and bring them together, colelctivise, in order to battle
against them. So I think that that is going to be the big trend in the
future of AI. It's all about where you see the value being created,
and right now you're starting to see the value created in controlling
the demand. And we need to retain that control of demand as personal
citizens through retaining control of our personal data. And that's
all I wanted to say. Thank you.
