\ifndef{bearOfLittleBrain}
\define{bearOfLittleBrain}

\newslide{}

\figure{\includejpg{\diagramsDir/ml/E.-H.-Shepard_Two-ink-drawings-from-The-House-at-Pooh-Corner-I_}{80%}}{Rabbit and Pooh watch the result of Pooh's hooshing idea to move Eeyore towards the shore.}{pooh-rabbit-hoosh}

\newslide{}

> When you are a Bear of Very Little Brain, and you Think of Things, you
> find sometimes that a Thing which seemed very Thingish inside you is
> quite different when it gets out into the open and has other people
> looking at it.
>
> A.A. Milne as Winnie-the-Pooh in *The House at Pooh Corner*, 1928

\notes{This comment from Pooh bear comes just as he's tried to rescue his
donkey friend, Eeyore, from a river by dropping a large stone on him
from a bridge. Pooh's idea had been to create a wave to push the donkey
to the shore, a process that Pooh's rabbit friend calls "hooshing".

Hooshing is a technique many children will have tried to retrieve a ball
from a river. It can work, so Pooh's idea wasn't a bad one, but the
challenge he faced was in its execution. Pooh aimed to the side of
Eeyore, unfortunately the stone fell directly on the stuffed donkey. But
where is Laplace's demon in hooshing? Just as we can talk about Gliders
and Loafers in Conway's Game of Life, we talk about stones and donkeys
in our Universe. Pooh's prediction that he can hoosh the donkey with the
stone is not based on the Theory, it comes from observing the way
objects interact in the actual Universe. Pooh is like the mice in
Douglas Adams's Earth. He is observing his environment. He looks for
patterns in that environment. Pooh then borrows the computation that the
Universe has already done for us. He has seen similar situations before,
perhaps he once used a stone to hoosh a ball. He is then generalising
from these previous circumstances to suggest that he can also hoosh the
donkey. Despite being a bear of little brain, like the mice on Adams's
Earth, Pooh can answer questions about his universe by observing the
results of the Theory of Everything playing out around him.}

\endif
