\ifndef{dataMaturityAssessment}
\define{dataMaturityAssessment}

\editme

\section{Data Maturity Assessment}

\slides{* Emerging from the DELIVE Initiatives Data Work [@Delve-data20]
* Recommendation for Data Maturity Assessments [@Lawrence-maturity20]}

\notes{As part of the work for DELVE on Data Readiness in an Emergency [@Delve-data20], we made recommendations around assessing data maturity, [@Lawrence-maturity20]. These recommendations were part of a range of suggestions for government to adopt to improve data driven decision making.}

\subsection{Characterising Data Maturity}

\notes{Diferent organisations differ in their ability to handle data. A data maturity assessment reviews the ways in which best practice in data
management and use is embedded in teams, departments, and business
processes. These indicators are  themed according to the maturity
level. These characteristics would be reviewed in
aggregate to give a holistic picture of data management across an
organisation.}

\subsubsection{1. Reactive}

*Data sharing is not possible or ad-hoc at best.*

a.  It is difficult to identify relevant data sets and their owners.

b.  It is possible to access data, but this may take significant time,
    energy and personal connections.

c.  Data is most commonly shared via ad hoc means, like attaching it to
    an email.

d.  The quality of data available means that it is often incorrect or
    incomplete.

\subsubsection{2. Repeatable}

*Some limited data service provision is possible and expected, in
particular between neighboring teams. Some limited data provision to
distinct teams may also be possible.*

a.  Data analysis and documentation is of sufficient quality to enable
    its replication one year later.

b.  There are standards for documentation that ensure that data is
    usable across teams.

c.  The time and effort involved in data preparation are commonly
    understood.

d.  Data is used to inform decision-making, though not always routinely.

\subsubsection{3. Managed and Integrated}

*Data is available through published APIs; corrections to requested data
are monitored and API service quality is discussed within the team. Data
security protocols are partially automated ensuring electronic access
for the data is possible.*

a.  Within the organisation, teams publish and share data as a supported
    output.

b.  Documentation is of sufficient quality to enable teams across the
    organisation that were not involved in its collection to use it
    directly.

c.  Procedures for data access are documented for other teams, and there
    is a way to obtain secure access to data.

\subsubsection{4. Optimized}

*Teams provide reliable data services to other teams. The security and
privacy implications of data sharing are automatically handled through
privacy and security aware ecosystems.*

a.  Within teams, data quality is constantly monitored, for instance
    through a dashboard. Errors could be flagged for correction.

b.  There are well-established processes to allow easy sharing of
    high-quality data across teams and track how the same datasets are
    used by multiple teams across the organisation.

c.  Data API access is streamlined by an approval process for joining
    digital security groups.

\subsubsection{5. Transparent}

*Internal organizational data is available to external organizations
with appropriate privacy and security policies. Decision making across
the organisation is data-enabled, with transparent metrics that could be
audited through organisational data logs. If appropriate governance
frameworks are agreed, data dependent services (including AI systems)
could be rapidly and securely redeployed on company data in the service
of national emergencies.*

a.  Data from APIs are combined in a transparent way to enable
    decision-making, which could be fully automated or through the
    organization’s management.

b.  Data generated by teams within the organisation can be used by
    people outside of the organization.


\notes{\subsection{Example Data Maturity Questions}}

\notes{Below is a set of questions that could be used in an organisation for assessing data maturity. The questions are targeted at individuals in roles where the decisions are data driven.}
 
\notes{1.	I regularly use data to make decisions in my job.
2.	I don't always know what data is available, or what data is best for my needs.
3.	It is easy to obtain access to the data I need.
4.	I document the processes I apply to render data usable for my department.
5.	To access the data I need from my department I need to email or talk to my colleagues.
6.	The data I would like to use is too difficult to obtain due to security restrictions.
7.	When dealing with a new data set, I can assess whether it is fit for my purposes in less than two hours.
8.	My co-workers appreciate the time and difficulty involved in preparing data for a task
9.	My management appreciates the time and difficulty involved in preparing data for a task.
10.	I can repeat data analysis I created greater than 6 months ago.
11.	I can repeat data analysis my team created from greater than 6 months ago.
12.	To repeat a data analysis from another member of my team I need to speak to that person directly.
13.	The data my team owns is documented well enough to enable people outside the team to use it directly.
14.	My team monitors the quality of the data it owns through the use of issue tracking (e.g. trouble tickets).
15.	The data my team generates is used by other teams inside my department.
16.	The data my team generates is used by other teams outside my department.
17.	The data my team generates is used by other teams, though I'm not sure who.
18.	The data my team generates is used by people outside of the organization.
19.	I am unable to access the data I need due to technical challenges. 
20.	The quality of the data I commonly access is always complete and correct.
21.	The quality of the data I commonly access is complete, but not always correct.
22.	The quality of the data I commonly access is often incorrect or incomplete.
23.	When seeking data, I find it hard to find the data owner and request access.
24.	When seeking data, I am normally able to directly access the data in its original location
25.	Poor documentation is a major problem for me when using data from outside my team.
26.	My team has a formal process for identifying and correcting errors in our data.
27.	In my team it is easy to obtain resource for making clean data available to other teams.
28.	For projects analyzing data my team owns, the majority of our time is spent on understanding data provenance.
29.	For projects analyzing data other teams own, the majority of our time is spent on understanding data provenance.
30.	My team views data wrangling as a specialized role and resources it accordingly.
31.	My team can account for each data set they manage.
32.	When a colleague requests data, the easiest way to share it is to attach it to an email.
33.	My team's main approach to analysis is to view the data in a spreadsheet program.
34.	My team has goals that are centred around improving data quality.
35.	The easiest way for me to share data outside the team is to provide a link to a document that explains how our data access APIs work.
36.	I find it easy to find data scientists outside my team who have attempted similar analyses to those I'm interested in.
37.	For data outside my team, corrupt data is the largest obstacle I face when performing a data analysis.
38.	My team understands the importance of meta-data and makes it available to other teams.
39.	Data I use from outside my team comes with meta-data for assessing its completeness and accuracy.
40.	I regularly create dashboards for monitoring data quality.
41.	My team uses metrics to assess our data quality.}


\endif
