\ifndef{recommenderSystems}
\define{recommenderSystems}
\editme

\section{Recommender Systems}

\notes{A recommender system aims to make suggestions for items (films,
books, other commercial products) given what it knows about users'
tastes. The recommendation engine needs to represent the *taste* of
all the users and the *characteristics* of each object. }

\notes{A common way for organizing objects is to place related objects
spatially close together. For example in a library we try and put
books that are on related topics near to each other on the
shelves. One system for doing this is known as
[Dewey Decimal Classification](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dewey_Decimal_Classification). In
the Dewey Decimal Classification system (which dates from 1876) each
subject is given a number (in fact it's a decimal number). For
example, the field of Natural Sciences and Mathematics is given
numbers which start with 500. Subjects based on Computer Science are
given numbers which start 004 and works on the 'mathematical
principles' of Computer science are given the series 004.0151 (which
we might store as 4.0151 on a Computer). Whilst it's a classification
system, the books in the library are typically laid out in the same
order as the numbers, so we might expect that neighbouring numbers
represent books that are related in subject. That seems to be exactly
what we want when also representing films. Could we somehow represent
each film's subject according to a number? In a similar way we could
then imagine representing users with a list of numbers that represent
things that each user is interested in.}

\notes{Actually a one dimensional representation of a subject can be
very awkward. To see this, let's have a look at the Dewey Decimal
Classification numbers for the 900s, which is listed as 'History and
Geography'. We will focus on subjects in the 940s which can be found
in this list from
[Nova Southeastern University](http://www.nova.edu/library/help/misc/lc_dewey/dewey900.html#40). Whilst
the ordering for places is somewhat sensible, it is also rather
arbitrary. In the 940s we have Europe listed from 940-949, Asia listed
from 950-959 and Africa listed from 960-969. Whilst it's true that
Asia borders Europe, Africa is also very close, and the history of the
Roman Empire spreads into
[Carthage](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carthage) and later on
Egypt. This image from Wikipedia shows a map of the Cathaginian Empire
which fell after fighting with Rome. }

\figure{\includepng{\diagramsDir/mlai/carthaginian-empire}{60%}}{The Carthaginian Empire at its peak.}{carthaginian-empire}

\notes{We now need to make a decision about whether Roman Histories
are European or African, ideally we'd like them to be somewhere
between the two, but we can't place them there in the Dewey Decimal
system because between Europe and Africa is Asia, which has less to do
with the Roman Empire than either Europe or Africa. Of course the fact
that we've used a map provides a clue as to what to do next. Libraries
are actually laid out on floors, so what if we were to use the spatial
lay out to organise the sujbects of the books in two dimensions. Books
on Geography could be laid out according to where in the world they
are referring to.}

\notes{Such complexities are very hard to encapsulate in one number,
but inspired by the map examples we can start considering how we might
lay out films in two dimensions. Similarly, we can consider laying out
a map of people's interests. If the two maps correspond to one
another, the map of people could reflect where they might want to live
in 'subject space'. We can think of representing people's tastes as
where they might best like to sit in the library to access easily the
books they are most interested in.}

\subsection{Inner Products for Representing Similarity}

\notes{Ideas like the above are good for gaining intuitions about what
we might want, but the one of the skills of data science is
representing those ideas mathematically. Mathematical abstraction of a
problem is one of the key ways in which we've been able to progress as
a society. Understanding planetary motions, as well as those of the
smallest molecule (to quote Laplace's
[Philosophical Essay on Probabilities](http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=1YQPAAAAQAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false))
needed to be done mathematically. The right mathematical model in
machine learning can be slightly more elusive, because constructing it
is a two stage process.}

\notes{
1. We have to determine the right intuition for the system we want to
   represent. Notions such as 'subject' and 'interest' are not
   mathematically well defined, and even when we create a new
   interpretation of what they might mean, each interpretation may
   have its own weaknesses.

2. Once we have our interpretation we can attempt to mathematically
formalize it. In our library interpretation, that's what we need to do
next.}

\subsection{The Library on an Infinite Plane}

\notes{Let's imagine a library which stores all the items we are
interested in, not just books, but films and shopping items too. Such
a library is likely to be very large, so we'll create it on an
infinite two dimensional plane. This means we can use all the real
numbers to represent the location of each item on the plane. For a two
dimensional plane, we need to store the locations in a vector of
numbers: we can decide that the $j$th item's location in the library
is given by}
$$
\mathbf{v}_j = \begin{bmatrix} v_{j,1} \\ v_{j,2}\end{bmatrix},
$$
\notes{where $v_{j,1}$ represents the $j$th item's location in the
East-West direction (or the $x$-axis) and $v_{j,2}$ represents the
$j$th item's location in the North-South direction (or the
$y$-axis). Now we need to specify the location where each user sits so
that all the items that interest them are nearby: we can also
represent the $i$th user's location with a vector}
$$
\mathbf{u}_i = \begin{bmatrix} u_{i,1} \\ u_{i,2}\end{bmatrix}.
$$
\notes{Finally, we need some way of recording a given user's affinity
for a given item. This affinity might be the rating that the user
gives the film. We can use $y_{i,j}$ to represent user $i$'s affinity
for item $j$. }

\notes{For our film example we might imagine wanting to order films in
a few ways. We could imagine organising films in the North-South
direction as to how romantic they are. We could place the more
romantic films further North and the less romantic films further
South. For the East-West direction we could imagine ordering them
according to how historic they are: we can imagine placing science
fiction films to the East and historical drama to the West. In this
case, fans of historical romances would be based in the North-West
location, whilst fans of Science Fiction Action films might be located
in the South-East (if we assume that 'Action' is the opposite of
'Romance', which is not necessarily the case). How do we lay out all
these films? Have we got the right axes? In machine learning the
answer is to 'let the data speak'. Use the data to try and obtain such
a lay out. To do this we first need to obtain the data.}

\endif
